Add additional explanations to vocabulary creation guide (#298)
w3c/wot-binding-templates: VOCABULARY-CREATION-GUIDE.md

# Vocabulary Creation Guide

Thing Description Forms can be extended with annotations that further describe how to access affordances.
These annotations are typically reused from existing protocol vocabularies that need to exist separately from the binding template document.
This document gives guidance on how such vocabularies can be created and how they should be used together with the templates and tools provided.

## Components of a Binding Template

Besides the actual binding template document that is to be used by implementors
(the `index.html` file), there are several additional companion documents which
enable the binding to be used in practice.
To enable TD consumers to understand the reused vocabularies, the definition of a
JSON-LD context file (`context.jsonld`) is necessary.
This file maps the TD-specific vocabulary defined in the binding template to an
OWL ontology (`ontology.ttl`), enabling the use of Semantic Web technologies.
Finally, a JSON schema file (`example-protocol.schema.json`) should be provided

> to enable automatic validation of forms using the binding template.

Author: Hmm, maybe we could simply remove the "automatic"?

```suggestion
to enable syntactic validation of forms using the binding template.
```

## Creating a New Vocabulary

In order to create a new Binding Template, you need to first conceptualize

> how the different parameters that can be set for a procotocol interaction can

Reviewer: ```suggestion
how the different parameters that can be set for a protocol interaction can
```
typo

be mapped to the different types of Interaction Affordances (Properties,
Actions, and Events).
For instance, an HTTP vocabulary for the Web of Things can define vocabulary
terms for the different kinds of methods (e.g., GET, POST, or PUT) that are
usable in requests.
Vocabulary terms can also be more specific to a certain type of Interaction
Affordance or operation type, e.g., Event Affordances or observable Properties.

> The mapping then needs to be cast into vocabulary terms based on the Web

Author: Hmm, I rather meant something like "transformed" here, would that work for you?

```suggestion
The mapping then needs to be transformed into vocabulary terms based on the Web
```

Ontology Language (OWL) and – more generally – the Resource Description
Framework (RDF).
This mapping can reuse existing, more general vocabularies and integrate them
into the Web of Things.
However, in cases where there is no pre-existing vocabulary for a protocol,
creating one that is only WoT-specific is also a valid option.

<!-- TODO: Add examples -->

## Document Rendering Workflow

Building upon the set of documents mentioned above, an automated rendering
process of the binding template document from the ontology can be established.
To do so, a `template.sparql` file needs to be created based on
[STTL](https://ns.inria.fr/sparql-template/), which defines rules for
transforming a source RDF graph into a result text.
The rules are applied to an `index.template.html` file which contains

> placeholders (`%s`) where the resulting tables are inserted.

Author: Good point, how about something like this?

```suggestion
placeholders (`%s`) where a formatted version of the vocabulary terms
(e.g., as a table) can be inserted.
```

> To be able to create these tables, the ontology vocabulary needs to be brought

Author: This line would need to be changed as well then, I suppose.

```suggestion
To be able to create a formatted version, the ontology vocabulary needs to be brought
```

into the right form using a mapping (in `mapping.ttl`) based on SHACL

> (Shapes Constraint Language).

Reviewer 2: The context.jsonld is also used to map the RDF properties to TD properties. eg. `hasAddress` to `address`

Reviewer 3: Will continue at https://github.com/w3c/wot-binding-templates/issues/338

Once the files are in place, they need to be inserted into the top-level
`render.js` file, which can not only create a rendered binding template

> (`index.html`) file but also a human-readble ontology file (`ontology.html`)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
(`index.html`) file but also a human-readable ontology file (`ontology.html`)
```

> which can be used as a alternative representation based on content negotiation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
which can be used as an alternative representation based on content negotiation.
```

> Thing Description Forms can be extended with annotations on how to activate affordances.

Reviewer 4: > activate affordances
gives the impression of only actuation on WoT devices, but with the property affordance we can also have sensing. Maybe we change this word to something which covers both cases. Suggestion from my side: `Thing Description Forms can be extended with annotations that further describe how to access affordances.`

Author: ```suggestion
Thing Description Forms can be extended with annotations that further describe how to access affordances.
```

> These annotations are typically from protocol vocabularies that need to exist separately from the binding template document.

Reviewer 4: Maybe: These annotations are typically reused from existing protocol vocabularies ...

Author: ```suggestion
These annotations are typically reused from existing protocol vocabularies that need to exist separately from the binding template document.
```

> This document gives guidance how such vocabularies can be created and how they should be used together with the templates and tools provided.

Reviewer 4: This document gives guidance on ...
which tools?
I think the content of the document does not match this sentence, it's a bit misleading. It does not describe how the vocabularies are actually created, rather once we have defined an additional protocol binding vocabulary how to generate the HTML specification.

Author: I now tried to add an initial, very rough description regarding the creation of a vocabulary in 2dbb28281679fc48a65d3ba87ac49d436c21862f. If that points in the right direction then we could potentially expand it further – looking forward to your feedback here :)

## Components of a Binding Template

Besides the actual binding template document that is to be used by implementors
(the `index.html` file), there are several additional companion documents which
enable the binding to be used in practice.

> To enable TD consumers to work with the added vocabulary, the definition of a

Reviewer 4: To enable TD consumers understand the reused vocabularies,...

Author: Thank you for your feedback, @mahdanoura! Where possible, I will turn your comments into GitHub suggestions like the one below so that they can be directly applied from the PR user interface.

```suggestion 
To enable TD consumers to understand the reused vocabularies, the definition of a
```

JSON-LD context file (`context.jsonld`) is necessary.
This file maps the TD-specific vocabulary defined in the binding template to an
OWL ontology (`ontology.ttl`), enabling the use of Semantic Web technologies.
Finally, a JSON schema file (`example-protocol.schema.json`) should be provided
to enable automatic validation of forms using the binding template.

Building upon this set of documents, an automated rendering process of the
binding template document from the ontology can be established.

> To do so, a `template.sparql` file needs to be created which can insert rendered

Reviewer 4: To do so, a `template.sparql` file needs to be created based on [STTL](https://ns.inria.fr/sparql-template/), which define rules for transforming a source RDF graph into a result text.

> To do so, a `template.sparql` file needs to be created which can insert rendered
> tables into placeholders (`%s`) within an `index.template.index` file.

Author: Would this work for you, @mahdanoura? Feel free to make another suggestion otherwise.

```suggestion
To do so, a `template.sparql` file needs to be created based on
[STTL](https://ns.inria.fr/sparql-template/), which defines rules for transforming a source RDF graph into a result text.
The rules are applied to an `index.template.html` file which contains placeholders
(`%s`) where the resulting tables are inserted.
```
